 A Mark III panel subjected to a flip-through wave impact: results from the Sloshel project 
 
L. Brosset(1), W. Lafeber(2), H. Bogaert(2), M. Marhem(1), P. Carden(3), J. Maguire(3) 
1GTT (Gaztransport & Technigaz), Saint-Rémy-lès-Chevreuse, France 
2MARIN, Hydro Structural Services, Wageningen, The Netherlands 
3Lloyd‟s Register EMEA, London, United Kingdom 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Within the Sloshel Joint Industrial Project, a new full scale wave 
impact test campaign has been carried out in April 2010. Uni directional 
focused waves were generated in a flume in order to impact a rigid wall 
in which an instrumented Mark  III LNG containment system panel had 
been embedded. The wall was entirely covered with the Mark  III 
corrugated membrane in the same way as on board a LNG carrier. 
During one of the last tests of the campaign a flip -through type of 
impact was generated and very high local pressures were measured. 
The horizontal small corrugations of the membrane were significantly 
deformed but no permanent deform ation of the foam was observed by 
initial visual inspection. After removing the Mark  III panel and cutting 
it into small blocks, no discernible cracking, no discernible permanent 
deformation and no discernible change of the initial properties were 
observed. 
This paper describes the main lessons obtained from this flip -through 
impact, through measurements related to the hydrodynamic loads, and 
through the structural response of the different components of the 
Mark III panel. 
 
KEY WORDS: Sloshing, LNG carrier , Mark  III, Corrugation, 
Containment System, Flip-Through, impact pressure, Sloshel 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The aim of the Sloshel full scale Mark  III tests was to study some key 
issues related to sloshing impacts in tanks of Mark  III LNG vessels 
through impact tests of breaking waves in a flume. Although obviously 
not identical to the real conditions, the conditions induced by impacts 
of breaking waves in a flume with water and air on a real Mark  III 
containment system are considered to be relevant for studying flu id-
structure interactions, scaling effects by comparison with a previous 
test campaign at scale 1:6 and wave –corrugation interactions. These 
tests also enabled the building of a reference data base for validation of 
numerical simulations. 
As the loads gene rated by the water are almost twice as large as those 
generated by LNG for similar waves due to the ratio of densities, 
caution was taken in order to not damage the membrane or the 
containment system before having stored enough data. The wooden -
wedge-reinforced version of the membrane was used and only large air-
pocket type or slosh type of impacts (inducing large but not extreme 
loads) were generated at first. These types of impacts, described in 
Brosset et al (2009), are believed to be the most representa tive of 
sloshing impacts for low and partial fill levels in tanks of LNG carriers. 
After 139 tests with such waves, without any discernible deformation 
of the corrugations, it was decided to generate intentionally a flip -
through type of impact, less likely  to occur onboard a ship but 
potentially capable to deform the corrugations and to damage the foam 
or the plywood plates of the Mark III panel. 
During test  140 a real flip -through impact was created, inducing a 
maximum measured pressure of 56  bar, the high est ever measured 
during the different campaigns of the Sloshel project. The horizontal 
corrugations of the membrane were significantly deformed with a 
maximum deflection of 5  mm. No permanent deformation of the foam 
was observed by initial visual inspecti on. After two subsequent tests 
generating moderate impacts, it was decided to end the campaign in 
order to allow a careful check of the Mark  III panel, including search 
for cracks after cutting the panel into small blocks and material tests. 
No residual de formation of the foam and no discernible change of the 
initial mechanical properties were observed. 
This paper describes in detail test  140, through the numerous 
measurements (pressures, strains, forces) and high speed videos 
recorded, related to both the loads and the response of the containment 
system including the corrugations. Reasons are proposed to explain 
why the foam was not crushed after the panel withstood a maximum 
pressure of 30  bar while its notional capacity is only 14  bar at ambient 
temperature in static conditions. 
 
TEST SET-UP 
 
The full scale Mark III tests were carried out in the outdoor Delta flume 
operated by Deltares in The Netherlands. The flume is 240  m long, 7 m 
high and 5  m wide. At one end it features a piston -type second order 
wave making system. Details of the set -up are given by Kaminski and 
Bogaert (2010). For the sake of simplicity, only the elements that are 
relevant to the present paper are described in the section below. 
 
General set-up 
 
A transverse concrete test wall was placed 145 m from the wave maker. 
A horizontal steel test panel was embedded into the test wall, enabling 
the mounting of two instrumented blocks at a height in between 5.0  m 
and 6.0 m above the bottom of the flume as indicated in Figure 1. The 
two blocks were 1.2 m wide and 1.0 m high. The first one, on the left in 
Figure 1, was a thick block of aluminium. The second one, on the right 
in Figure 1, was a Mark  III panel cut in order to fit within the opening 
(1.2 m wide instead of 3  m originally). The panel was assembled from 
components delivered by a Mark  III certified manufacturer. The two 
blocks were bonded at their back sides to meta llic plates (force plates) 
lying on load cells. The Mark  III panel was glued on the force plate 
using horizontal mastic ropes running over its whole width and spaced 
every 100 mm. 
The test wall was completely covered by the Mark  III corrugated 
membrane in the same way as on board a LNG carrier, as shown in 
Figure 1. The large corrugations were set vertically. This choice was 
motivated by the fact that, when deformed corrugations have been 
observed on board LNG carri ers in the lower part of the tanks, they 
were most of the time located on the longitudinal bulkheads. As the 
tests were performed with water, thus with a density more than twice 
the density of LNG, the reinforced version of the Mark  III membrane 
was used. In this version, installed recently on board some Mark  III 
ships, the large corrugations have ribs and all corrugations are 
strengthened by wooden wedges. 
 
Figure 1 - Test set -up of full scale Mark  III tests. Test panel, rigid 
block, Mark III panel, corrugation sensors and observation window. 
 
Instrumentation 
 
Each block was instrumented with 52 pressure sensors placed flush on 
its surface running through and welded to the membrane. The 
configurations of sensors on both blocks we re symmetrical to the 
middle vertical line of the wall. The sensors can be distinguished on 
Figure 1. These configurations with the numbering of the sensors are 
detailed in Figure 2. The letters „R‟, „M‟ and „P‟ st and respectively for 
„Rigid block‟, „Mark III block‟ and „Pressure sensor‟. 
Two especially -designed corrugations sensors  were developed by 
MARIN. Such sensors have the shape of real corrugations and were set-
up on the wall instead of the original corrugati ons. Each sensor 
measured two forces exerted by the flow on each side of the 
corrugation, perpendicular to the corrugation in the wall plane. The 
forces are positive when oriented towards the centre of the corrugation. 
A vertical and a horizontal corrugati on sensor were set up on the rigid 
block. They can be readily distinguished on Figure 1. 
  
Rigid block Mark III block 
Figure 2 - Configuration of pressure sensors on Rigid block and 
Mark III panel. 
The Mark  III panel was also instrumented with strain gauges and 
accelerometers on (1) the inside of the plywood cover plate, (2) the 
triplex membrane and (3) both sides of the bottom plywo od plate. 
Figure 3 shows the sensor configurations for both plywood plates. The 
letters „S‟ and „A‟ stand respectively for „Strain gauge‟ and for 
„Accelerometer‟. 
  
Underneath the top plate Both sides of the bottom plate 
Figure 3 – Configuration of accelerometers (black) and strain gauges 
(orange) for the top and the bottom plates of Mark  III block. Top 
views. 
Transient foam displacements were captured by an optical system 
based on two high speed ca meras observing a section of the foam 
coated by a speckle raster. The two cameras were fixed as rigidly as 
possible at the left upper side of the Mark  III panel inside the wall. The 
speckle pattern and the two high speed cameras observing the pattern 
are s hown in Figure 4. The area observed by the cameras spans the 
whole thickness of the foam on a total height of 250  mm in between 
h1=5.650 m and h2=5.900  m. This area is centred on the upper 
corrugation of the Mark  III block. It is the area targeted to be impacted 
by the crests of the waves and to withstand the highest pressures. This 
area is also covered by the largest density of pressure sensors and strain 
gauges. 
An observation window was fitted in the longitudinal  flume wall, 
adjacent to the impacted wall, at the same height as the test panel. The 
window was 1.5  m high and 1  m wide and can be seen on the white 
painted flume wall in Figure 1. Behind the thick glass of the 
observation window three high speed video cameras were installed. For 
each impact, the first camera (HSC1) recorded the full view, the second 
camera (HSC2) focused on the area in between the middle and the 
upper corrugations and the third camera (HSC3) zoome d closer around 
the upper corrugation. 
 
  
Figure 4 - Speckle pattern at the left side of the Mark  III panel (left), 
and high speed cameras observing the speckle pattern (right). 
The data acquisition system for the pressure sensors, strain gauges, 
accelerometers and load cells sampled at 50  kHz. The cameras 
observing the displacements of the foam section recorded at 15  kHz. 
The three cameras inside the observation window were recording 
respectively at 5  kHz, 5  kHz and 1.2  kHz. All the cameras were 
synchronized with the data acquisition system. 

The maximum measured pressure (55.6  bar) was obtained on sensor 
RP36 of the rigid block. The instant for which the maximum is reached 
is taken as the origin of time throughout this paper. 
 
HYDRO-DYNAMICS AND LOADS 
 
All impacting waves during this campaign were generated by a 
focusing technique (see Hofland et al., 2010 and Kimmoun et al., 
2010). Wave packets were generated by the paddle in order to meet at a 
theoretical focal point. The main parameter enabling the adj ustment of 
the shape of the wave just before the impact was the location of the 
focal point with regards to the wall. Test  140 was a Flip -Through type 
of impact, which is considered as a limit case in between the air -pocket 
type and the slosh type of impac t (see Kaminski et al., 2011, Bogaert et 
al., 2010, Brosset et al., 2009). It is difficult to realize such a flip -
through impact in laboratory conditions. Here, the waves have been 
designed very carefully with an accurate tuning of the parameters at 
first in a small flume in order to master better the repeatability of the 
global flow (shape of the wave just in front of the wall) and to obtain as 
high a pressure as possible. It is considered that this kind of wave is 
very unlikely to happen in real (in -service) conditions. Nevertheless it 
is interesting because it brings insight about fluid -structure interaction 
in highly dynamic conditions. 
 
The Flip-Through impact 
 
Figure 5 shows three pictures recorded by the high speed camera 
HSC1 inside the observation w indow at three instants just before the 
impact. There is a time step of 30 ms between the pictures. 
 
  
  
t= -75.6 ms t= -45.6 ms t= -15.6 ms 
Figure 5  – Wave shape for test  140 just before the impact (Camera 
HSC1). The black arrows represent the velociti es of the bubbles inside 
the water near the free surface. Vmax=8 m/s. 
The first observation that can be made from these pictures is that, as 
intended, the flow is globally 2D, if the boundary effects on the two 
longitudinal walls are disregarded. Actually, a close look at the pictures 
shows that the liquid section close to the observation window is slightly 
delayed, by a few centimetres compared to the section on the opposite 
wall. This is confirmed by the analysis of the pressure signals on the 
horizontal lines of sensors. The signal pattern is globally reproduced 
from the right to the left but with an almost constant delay of 2.3  ms 
from pressure sensor column of sensor MP47 (right part of the Mark  III 
block) to column of sensor RP47 (left part of the rig id block). Another 
consequence is that what is seen from the observation window happens 
around 2 ms after it has happened on the Mark  III block and 1  ms after 
it has happened on the rigid block. 
There are two main global processes that are progressing toge ther: the 
run-up of the wave trough and the forward moving of an almost vertical 
wave front. 
The run-up process of the wave trough is a general process that would 
also appear for Air -pocket-type or Slosh -type of impacts. This process 
mitigates the impact w hatever the type because it converts smoothly a 
part of the horizontal momentum of the wave to a vertical momentum. 
For a Flip-Through impact the speed of the run-up is higher than for the 
two other types. Here the maximum vertical velocity of the trough i s 
4.7 m/s. If the wall were smooth (without corrugations), this run -up 
process would not induce any significant load on the wall until the 
wave front is close enough. These conditions have been called 
restricted wave trough  in Bogaert et al. (2010). In the se conditions, an 
upward vertical jet would start building from the trough and a pressure 
pulse would arise from the root of the jet at the wave trough 
intersection with the wall and travel with the wave trough along the 
wall. Until these restricted trough conditions are met, the free surface of 
the trough intersects the wall perpendicularly. 
The moving forward of the wave front is also a general process for 
all types of waves. It can lead to an overturning crest for an Air -Pocket 
type of impact which would  hit directly the wall. The maximum 
horizontal speed of the front was 8  m/s for test  140. As both the wave 
front is moving forward and the trough is running up, the space filled 
by the air in between the front, the trough and the wall is decreasing 
quickly. This induces an upward vertical air flow. This flow shears the 
free surface, drawing drops of water out of the bulk of liquid and 
creating strong irregularities on the free surface and a spray around it. 
This instability of the free surface is known as t he Kelvin -Helmotz 
instability (see Drazin, 2004) and is believed to be the main cause of 
the non -repeatable impact pressure measurements on the wall when 
repeating accurately the impact conditions. The speed of the extracted 
drops can be evaluated from hig h speed camera records and gives an 
estimation of the air flow vertical velocity. Here the maximum vertical 
speed of air is evaluated at 50  m/s. Another influence of the air flow is 
to shape the free surface. For test  140 there is no clear crest. The actio n 
of the air jet helps preventing the overturning of the crest. 
 
The loading processes 
 
The trough run -up and the forward move of the wave front are global 
processes. At each time the trough passes by a corrugation, the same 
local phenomena happen: 
1. immersion of the corrugation (water entry of the corrugation in a 
reference system linked to the corrugation) and separation of the 
flow; 
2. reattachment of the flow to the wall; 
3. entrapment of a small air pocket in between the corrugation and the 
reattachment point, and compression of this air pocket. 
These local phenomena are quite smooth as 
long as the trough is unrestricted, and do 
not generate significant loading of the wall 
or the corrugations. When the wave front is 
very close, these phenomena become 
stronger a nd generate new local 
phenomena that interact also with the 
corrugations. These phenomena are 
detailed in this subsection through the 
video recordings, the pressure 
measurements and the force measurements 
on the horizontal corrugation sensor. For 
the sake of simplicity, only pressure signals 
of sensors RP1 to RP8 of the rigid block 
(see Figure 2) are given in this section to 
illustrate the different phenomena. These 
sensors, located on the first right column of 
sensors in the rigid block, give the longest 
 
Figure 6 – Pressure 
signals at RP1 to RP8. 

series of working sensors in a column. 
As there is a good 2D behavior of the wave, with good duplication of 
the signal patterns horizontally (at least on the rigid block), this colum n 
of sensors is representative of the loading processes on the whole rigid 
block. The eight pressure signals and the locations of the related 
sensors are given in Figure 6. 
 Direct impact due to the reattachment of the trough 
When the trough is restricted b y the close presence of the wave front, 
the reattachment of the flow, after separation imposed by the run -up 
along the corrugation, may be very violent. This is the case during 
test 140 for the reattachment following the separation from the middle 
horizontal corrugation of the blocks, as illustrated by Figure 7 by a 
succession of pictures taken by camera HSC2 at very short time 
intervals. 
 
  
  
   
t= -8.22 ms t= -6.62 ms t= -5.22 ms t= -3.22 ms Sketch of free surf. 
Figure 7 – Separation and reattachment of the flow after the run -up 
along the middle corrugation (HSC2). 
This reattachment leads to a local impact close to sensor row of RP7 
with a horizontal velocity evaluated from the videos at 16  m/s. The 
maximum impact pressure r ecorded for this local impact is 46.1  bar at 
RP7. This kind of hydrodynamic impact is very localized: the sensors 
RP6 and RP8, only 60  mm away from RP7, felt the consequences of 
the hydrodynamic impact (described later) but not directly the pressure 
peak. It is also very short: around 0.5 ms at RP7. 
The reattachment of the flow leads to the entrapment and the 
compression of a small air pocket in between the middle corrugation 
and the impact point. Sensor RP8 is located inside this small air pocket. 
The boundary of the pocket is clearly visible on the picture at instant 
t= -3.22 ms of Figure 7. As a consequence the white cloud around the 
pocket must be considered as aerated water. 
There is also such a reattachment a few milliseconds later after the 
separation due to the run -up along the upper horizontal corrugation of 
the blocks. The reattachment is not obvious from the videos but is 
logically expected and can be deduced from the pattern of the pressure 
signals at sensor RP3. Figure 8 shows the pressure signals at RP8, RP7 
and RP3. 
Figure 8 – Pressure 
signals at RP3, RP7 and 
RP8. Impact pressures due 
to the reattachments after 
separation at middle (RP7) 
and upper (RP3) 
corrugation. Pressure in 
the entrapped gas pocket 
(RP8). 
 
The re attachment of the flow to the wall is a direct impact that 
generates locally a pressure wave into the liquid and a strain wave into 
the impacted structure. The pressure wave into the liquid after the first 
reattachment is clearly visible on the high speed videos. As the water is 
aerated, the color of the water becomes darker when the front of the 
wave is passing by, because the bubbles are compressed. This reason 
has been clearly demonstrated by a close observation of large bubbles 
crossed by the pressure w ave. The speed of the pressure wave has been 
evaluated around 250 m/s from the videos. This value corresponds to a 
speed of sound in water with 1% of aeration. With such a speed of 
sound of the aerated water and the impact velocity of 16  m/s already 
given, the acoustic pressure on a rigid wall would be 40  bar. The 
maximum impact pressure of 46.1 bar obtained on the rigid block is in 
line with this scenario. 
The direct impacts due to the reattachment of a restricted wave trough 
after separation from a horizo ntal corrugation are very much like wave 
crest impacts. They lead to non -traveling pressure pulses of large 
amplitude and short duration, much localized (radius of less than 
60 mm here). Such events are thus difficult to capture and might be 
missed by the network of pressure sensors although actually present. 
 Vertical jet building from the reattaching trough 
After each impact due to a reattachment, a vertical upward liquid jet is 
building from the impact point. The development of this jet after the 
first reattachment around pressure sensor RP7 is described in Figure 9 
by a succession of pictures taken by HSC2 at very short time intervals. 
 
  
  
   
t= -3.02 ms t= -2.42 ms t= -1.82 ms t= -1.22 ms Sketch of free surf 
Figure 9 – Building upward vertical jet from the reattaching trough 
(HSC2). 
The root of the jet is located at a point on the wall which is moving 
upwards because the wave front is still feeding the impact area. This 
area is thus becoming larger. Close to this point, th e velocities in the 
fluid have to take a very sharp turn, which leads to a pressure pulse on 
the wall traveling upwards with the point. This traveling pulse is very 
much like the traveling pressure pulse induced by a drop of a wedge 
into water initially at  rest, a good approximation of which is given by 
the so-called Wagner solution (see Wagner, 1932). 
Such a traveling pulse is captured by pressure sensors RP6 and RP5 due 
to the liquid jet building from the first reattachment above the middle 
corrugation and afterwards by pressure sensors RP2 and RP1 due to the 
liquid jet building from the second reattachment above the upper 
corrugation. 
Figure 10 shows the pressure signals at RP6, RP5, RP2 and RP1.  Only 
the first rise and decrease of the pressure signals at  RP6 and RP5 is 
explained by the traveling pulse due to the building jet. From these 
signals, a vertical velocity of the root of the jet can be estimated, which 
is around 60  m/s for the first event and around 43  m/s for the second 
event. 

Figure 10 – Pressure 
signals at RP6, RP5, RP2 
and RP1. Traveling pulses 
at the root of vertical jets 
following the reattachment 
above the middle 
corrugation (RP6 and RP5) 
and above the upper 
corrugation (RP2 and 
RP1).  
 Direct impact of the jet on the upper corrugation 
The upward jet induced by the reattachment will hit the upper 
corrugation. At the same time the gas below the corrugation is still 
escaping, turning around the corrugation. These processes are described 
in Figure 11 by a succession of pictures taken by camera HSC2 at very 
short time intervals. 
 
  
  
   
t= -1.02 ms t= -0.42 ms t= 0.78 ms t= 1.98 ms Sketch of free surf 
Figure 11 – Impact of the jet on the upper corrugation. Compression of 
the escaping gas below the corrugation until a sudden Rayleigh -Taylor 
(RT) gas/liquid mixing process (HSC2). 
The volume of air in between the upper corrugation, the trough and the 
front is decreasing quickly. However the gas is not entrapped and can 
escape along the corru gation. The white cloud that is seen in the first 
three pictures of Figure 11 is due to the Kelvin -Helmotz instability of 
the free surface induced by the air jet tangential to the free surface. 
Two sensors can help to understand in more in depth what happe ns 
locally - they are the bottom part of the horizontal corrugation sensor 
and the pressure sensor RP4 just under the upper corrugation. Their 
signals are shown on Figure 12. 
Figure 12 – Pressure 
signals at RP4 and 
force signal at the 
bottom part of the 
horizontal corrugation 
sensor. 
 
It can be seen that there are two parts in the pressure signal at RP4. The 
first slope is due to the traveling pressure pulse at the root of the jet. So 
after passing along sensors RP6 and RP5 (see  Figure 10), the trough is 
reaching sensor RP4. There is no increase of the pressure before this 
sharp raise which confirms that the sensor was not within an entrapped 
air pocket and the air was still able to escape along the corrugation. 
The force on the corrugation sensor starts rising before the root of the 
jet reaches sensor RP4 although there is no gas pocket compression. 
Hence, this first rise is due to the impact of the jet on the root of the 
corrugation. The jet is very thin and cannot alone be resp onsible for the 
following rise of the force. A possible scenario is that the thin layer of 
gas flowing below the corrugation starts to be highly compressed 
because the gas cannot escape quickly enough. This scenario would 
explain that very suddenly during the rise of the force on the 
corrugation, a new cloud of bubbles appears as can be seen on the 
fourth picture of Figure 11 (t=1.98 ms). It looks as though the layer of 
gas explodes, penetrating the free surface by means of bubbles and 
preventing reaching a n even higher pressure. This intrusion of the gas 
through a liquid free surface is known as the Rayleigh -Taylor process 
(see Drazin, 2004). It appears as a mitigating process that should be 
studied carefully in the context of sloshing. 
 Other phenomena 
If one wishes to understand any details of the pressure signals on the 
rigid block, one needs to be aware that, at any point of the liquid, there 
is not only the influence of local events but also an influence of remote 
events. This influence decreases rapidly with the distance (~1/r2). When 
the liquid is considered as incompressible the information is supposed 
to be transmitted instantaneously. In the reality, it is traveling 
continuously through the liquid at the speed of sound by means of 
pressure waves from one pressure source to any remote point. 
Four main elementary loading processes have been described above: 
the direct impact while the surrounding gas can escape freely, the 
traveling pulse at the root of a jet, the compression/expansion of an 
entrapped g as pocket, and the quick compression of a thin jet of 
escaping gas. Most of the time, only the last three processes are directly 
measured by pressure sensors. The direct impact process is much 
localized and it is unlikely to have a sensor just at the right  point. What 
is measured when the phenomenon is captured by a sensor is the remote 
influence transmitted from the source by a pressure wave. This is likely 
to be the case for pressure peaks measured at RP3 and RP7 shown on 
Figure 8. This also implies that the maximum pressure measured is not 
necessarily the maximum pressure actually reached in the vicinity. 
The second bump of the pressure signal at RP5 and the third bumps of 
pressure signals at RP6 and RP7 can also be considered as  the remote 
influence of the final impact on the corrugation . This can be seen more 
clearly on Figure 13 gathering all pressure time traces of sensors RP1 
to RP8. 
The analysis of the remote influence of a loading process is made 
complex by the fact that these loading processes are very local and 
some particular events may have occurred that were not captured by the 
high speed camera recordings. Moreover the level of aeration in the 
vicinity of the wall can quickly vary in space and in time (presence of 
bubble clouds for instance), w hich induces strong variations of the 
speed of sound. 
 Summary 
All pressure signals of sensors RP1 to RP8 are gathered on Figure 13. 
 
Figure 13 – Pressure signals at sensors RP1 to RP8 and force signal at 
the bottom part of the horizontal corrugation sensor. 

The different parts of the pressure signals recorded during test 140 have 
been induced by only four different types of elementary local loading 
processes plus remote influences propagated by pressure waves. These 
local phenomena are similar as those already seen during drop -tests of 
wedges into water initially at rest in case the surface of the dropping 
wedge includes transverse corrugations or raised edges. For more 
details about these local loading processes, refer to Lafeber et al., 2011. 
 
HYDRO-STRUCTURAL INTERACTION 
 
The Mark  III block was instrumented with many sensors. In this 
section, we will focus on the top left part of the block, from the middle 
corrugation to the top and from its left section to the first vertical 
corrugation (see Figure 1, Figure 2 and Figure 3). As the top part was 
the targeted impact area for all tests, supposed to withstand the highest 
loads, the left section of this top part was watched by the optical system 
(two high speed cameras inside the w all) and the top left area was 
instrumented with the highest density of sensors. 
Figure 14 shows the locations of 
these different sensors and their 
numbering, including Pressure 
sensors (M P), Strain gauges ( ST) 
and Accelerometers ( AT) behind 
the Top plate,  Strain gauges ( SB) 
and Accelerometers ( AB) on both 
sides of the Bottom plate. The 
section of the foam as seen by the 
optical system (in grey) 
corresponds to a state at rest. The 
triplex membrane is represented by 
a vertical line - it could not be 
detected from the pictures of the 
optical system. The top and back 
plates have also been added. The 
top plate is out of shot but the back 
plate is in shot of the two high 
speed cameras. 
 
Figure 14  – Instrumentation of 
the top left part of the Mark  III 
block. Pr essure sensors in blue. 
Strain gauges and 
accelerometers, both in red. 
The pictures from the optical system presented in this paper have been 
corrected from optical distortions and rigid body motion. After post -
processing, the displacements and thus the s trains can be derived from 
the pictures at every point. A grid of reference points has been added on 
Figure 14. The time traces of the normal strains presented later have 
been post-processed at these locations. 
 
Maximum deflections in the Mark III panel 
 
The maximum transient displacement of the foam normal to its 
thickness is 2.6  mm and is obtained just under the slit at t= -0.29 ms, 
almost when the maximum pressure is reached on the Mark  III block. 
The maximum normal strain is 1.5%. At the same time the fo am is 
sheared due to the upward vertical force exerted by the flow on the 
corrugation and transmitted to the top plate. The maximum vertical 
displacement is 1.4  mm. These values are relatively low compared to 
the threshold for permanent deflection of the f oam as it will be 
described in the next section dedicated to Strength. 
Figure 15 shows the deformed foam and back plate at this instant with 
a magnification factor of ten. The foam is colored according to the level 
of normal strains, as post -processed from the pictures recorded by the 
optical system. 
The relaxation slit in the primary foam underneath the upper 
corrugation avoids the generation of high shear stresses in the top plate. 
As a consequence there is a higher concentration of normal stresses in 
the primary barrier just below the upper corrugation. The presence of 
the very stiff mastic ropes induces also a concentration of normal 
stresses in their vicinity. The bottom plate behaves as a beam stiffened 
by the foam and supported by several almost rigid  mastic ropes. The 
different displacements in the normal direction (x) between the two 
sides of the slit behind the upper corrugation induce necessarily a slight 
rotation downwards of the corrugation and of the inner wooden wedge. 
 
 
 
Figure 15 – Deformed foam 
with coloration according to 
normal strains (left). 
Deformed back plywood 
plate (red line on the right) - 
Instant t= -0.29 ms. Both 
obtained from post -
processing of two high speed 
cameras inside the wall 
(optical system). 
 
Comparison of the loads on the two blocks 
 
The different local loading processes on the rigid block have been 
described in detail in the previous section. Figure 13 summarizes all 
pressure signals recorded by the pressure sensors RP1 to RP8 on the 
same column of sensors of the r igid block (see Figure 2 for the exact 
locations). The mirror column of pressure sensors on the Mark III block 
also had 8 sensors MP1 to MP8. Their locations are shown in Figure 2 
and Figure 14. Unfortunately four of them were out of order during 
test 140. Sensors MP1, MP4, MP5 and MP8 were working 
satisfactorily. Their time traces are shown in Figure 16. 
 
Figure 16 – Pressure signals at MP1, MP4, MP5, MP8 on the Mark III 
block. 
The same main events happened in front of the Mar k III block as in 
front of the Rigid block although a few millisecond earlier, as already 
mentioned. The reattachment of the flow to the wall, after separation 
from the middle corrugation, induced the entrapment of an air pocket in 
between the middle corru gation and the reattachment point. MP8 was 
inside the pocket or close to its boundary. Signals at MP8 and RP8 are 
therefore very similar. There was no working sensor available at the 
reattachment location (around MP7) and thus the much localized 
pressure pulse due to the impact was not captured. But from the impact 
point arose an upward vertical jet. The quick rise of the MP5 pressure 
signal at -2.5 ms is due to the root of the jet passing by the sensor. The 
same kind of traveling pulse at the root of a ver tical jet was also seen 
on pressure sensors RP6, RP5 and RP4 of the rigid block. 
The main difference between the two blocks is that the reattachment on 
Mark III side also entrapped a gas pocket below the upper corrugation. 
Both MP4 and MP5 were inside the gas pocket at the reattachment 
time, which explains that they recorded the same pressures until MP5 

went out of the pocket around -2.5 ms. It can be checked on Figure 13 
that the sharp rise of pressure due to the traveling pulse on signals RP6, 
RP5 and RP4  started from a null pressure, which proves that the air 
around could escape quickly enough and thus that there was no gas 
pocket below the upper corrugation of the rigid block. 
The presence of a gas pocket underneath the upper corrugation of the 
Mark III block also explains the significantly smoother pressure peak at 
MP4 compared to RP4 even though  the maximum pressure obtained is 
not only due to the compression of air. 
This local difference of the loading processes could be explained by 3D 
effects, as only a tiny difference on the incident flows would be needed 
to make it. In that case, the reduction of maximum pressure on Mark  III 
block with regards to the rigid block would be pure chance. 
Nevertheless, one can also consider that the entrapment of the gas  
pocket underneath the upper corrugation has been favored by the 
receding of the primary foam and the rotation downwards of the 
corrugation. This could thus have been considered as a result of the 
fluid-structure interaction on the Mark  III panel. The hydr o-elasticity 
would not only be a simple mass/spring issue but could also cause the 
switch between different local loading processes. 
 
Time traces of strains in the Mark III panel 
 
There are five different parts in the Mark  III structure that should be 
scrutinized separately: the plywood top plate, the foam (primary and 
secondary), the plywood back plate, the triplex sheet and the mastic 
ropes. Due to the concision requested for a conference paper, only the 
first three parts, considered as the weak structura l points, are presented. 
For the triplex sheet, it is apparent that its influence is moderate as there 
is no discontinuity of the normal strains in the foam in its vicinity (see 
Figure 15). Only a selection of signals among many others is presented 
here in  order to give a sense of what is considered to have really 
mattered during the impact. 
 Top plate 
Figure 17 presents the strain time traces as measured by the strain 
gauges underneath the plywood top plate (ST1 to ST8, see Figure 14). 
These are longitudina l strains, the direction of the gauges being 
vertical. Positive strains mean tension of the lower fibers. 
 
Figure 17 – Strain (microstrain) time traces measured by gauges ST1 
to ST8 under the top plate of the Mark III block. 
The signal ST2, ST6 and ST8 have been voluntarily excluded of 
Figure 17 for the sake of readability and because they did not bring 
much insight. Reference is made to Figure 16 for comparison with the 
pressure signals on sensors MP1, MP4, MP5 and MP8 on top of the 
plate. Colors are the same for signals from strain gauges and pressure 
sensors at the same height. 
The strains in Figure 17 are most of the time positive (tension of the 
fibers) because the main events (reattachment near MP7 and strong 
compression o f the gas pocket under the corrugation) lead to a local 
bending of the top plate which has to be counterbalanced further by an 
opposite bending inducing a global dynamic behavior of the plate. This 
is particularly clear when looking at ST7 strain around -0.7 ms: while 
the load is increasing quickly just below the slit, the shape of the plate 
is forced to accommodate at ST7, far from the event. 
The response at ST4 follows closely the load at MP4. This gauge gives 
the maximum strain which is still low (1.8 10 -3). It is reached only with 
a small delay (0.2 ms) after the maximum at MP4. 
Due to the relaxation slit behind the corrugations, the top plate is split 
in independent parts vertically. Strains at ST1 to ST3 above the upper 
slit and at ST4 to ST8 below the  upper slit should be largely decoupled 
as they are located on two separate parts of the plate. Actually, the drop 
of the strain on gauge ST3 while the pressure rises at MP4 (and thus the 
strain rises at ST4) indicates that the corrugation and its inner wo oden 
wedge transmit a part of the load to the upper part of the plate which 
tends to bend its edge towards the interior of the panel. 
These signals bring indirect information about loading processes that 
could not been recorded directly because of broken p ressure sensors 
(MP2, MP3, MP6, MP7): (1) the reattachment after the flow separation 
from the middle corrugation that was captured on the rigid block by 
sensor RP7 (see Figure 8) occurred also on the Mark  III panel. The 
first two peaks of ST7 are the respo nse of this impact; (2) the 
reattachment after the flow separation from the upper corrugation that 
was captured by sensor RP3 (see Figure 8) occurred also on the 
Mark III panel around broken sensor MP3. The large peak around 
t=0.5 ms is the consequence of this impact. The peak of ST1 around 
t=2 ms is due to the passage of the root of the vertical jet (maximum 
just a little delayed compared to maximum of MP1) following the 
reattachment. 
The accelerometers AT1 to AT8 located under the top plate show an 
intense dynamic activity from the impact due to the reattachment with a 
saturation of the sensors at around 400  g. Fast Fourier Transforms of 
both strains and accelerations do not show clear modes. 
The maximum level of strain recorded in the whole top plate is 0 .002 
(0.2%). 
 Foam 
The post-processing of the images recorded at 15  kHz by the two high 
speed cameras inside the wall provides relevant information on the 
structural behavior of the Mark  III panel like, for instance, the 
displacement, the strains in the mai n directions 
 xx (normal to the wall) 
and 
 zz (vertical), the shear strain 
 xz or 
 zx, and the acceleration at any 
point in the image. Figure 18 shows the time traces of the normal 
strains at the six points through the thickness of the foam on the same 
horizontal line as sensor MP4 and on the same line as sensor MP5 (see 
Figure 14 for the exact location of the points). Starting from the top of 
the top plate, the first point on a horizontal line is 30  mm away. The 
next points are located every 50 mm. 
  
h = 5.667 m (in front of sensor MP5) h = 5.726 m (in front of sensor MP4) 
Figure 18 – Time traces of the normal strains 
 xx as post-processed by 
the optical system at six points at the same height as MP5  (left), at six 
points at the same height as MP4 (right). 
Negative values of the normal strain mean that the foam is in 

compression. 
A simple verification of these values consists in comparing the mean 
value over a horizontal line (say, the line starting from MP4) at a time 
this value is at a maximum (mean(
 xx) = -0.0074) with the difference of 
maximum displacements at the two ends of the line divided by the 
thickness of the panel ((0.5-2.5)/270=-0.0074). 
The normal strain field at t= -0.29 ms, correspondin g to the maximum 
pressure (recorded at MP4) and approximately to the maximal strain, is 
given in Figure 15. The coloration helps to understand the distribution 
of the strains in the foam and therefore the distribution along the two 
horizontal lines from MP 5 and MP4. For instance, it can be noticed 
from Figure 18 (left) that the maximum strains on the line starting from 
MP5 is reached after the maximum on the line at MP4, although the 
maximum load at MP5 is reached much before the maximum load at 
MP4. This i s clearly due to a 2D behavior within the foam imposed 
mainly by the global dynamic behavior of the top plate leading to a 
spreading of the strain field from the load source. This influence of the 
top plate explains also a more dynamic behavior of the poin ts in the 
vicinity of the top plate. 
The maximum strain in the foam obtained from the optical system is 
around 1.5% just under the slit. We will come back on this point in the 
next section and compare it with the strength. 
 Back plate 
Figure 19 presents the  strain time traces as measured by the strain 
gauges SB3 to SB7 alternatively on both sides of the plywood back 
plate in view of the optical system (see Figure 3 and Figure 14 for 
exact locations). These are longitudinal strains, the direction of the 
gauges being vertical. Positive strains mean tension of the fibers. 
 
Figure 19 – Strain (microstrain) time traces measured by gauges SB3 
to SB7, over and underneath the back plate of the Mark III block. 
All strains are positive, which corresponds to the bending behavior of a 
beam stiffened by the foam supported by the rigid mastic ropes. 
Maximum strain in the whole back plate is around 0.002 (0.2%). 
 
STRENGTH ANALYSIS 
 
Before test 140, two tests had already induced large pressures t hough 
smaller than during test  140. A visual inspection had been conducted 
after these two tests and no deformation of the corrugations had been 
observed. Therefore, it is considered very unlikely that any deformation 
of the corrugations was present before  test 140. After test  140 clear 
deformations of the small horizontal corrugations, but no deformations 
of the large vertical corrugations, were observed visually. A thorough 
inspection of the corrugations was carried out with precise 
measurements of the in dentations. During this inspection no visible 
permanent depression of the membrane in front of the Mark  III block 
was noticed. It was then decided to reproduce twice a moderate wave 
impact that had already been tested in order to compare the new strain 
measurements with the previous ones and detect a potential damage of 
the panel. As no clear modification was observed in the response of the 
containment system, it was decided to stop the test campaign and check 
carefully the foam and the plywood plates of the Mark III test panel. 
This section describes the state of the Mark  III test panel after test  140 
through the results of the different investigations. Strength curves from 
static tests at ambient are provided for the different components of 
Mark III and a short analysis is done for a comparison between the 
Sloshel measurements and what would have been expected from these 
curves. 
 
Small reinforced Corrugations 
 
As already mentioned, the reinforced version of the membrane was 
used during the Sloshel Mark  III test campaign. Figure 20 (left) shows 
the distribution of the wooden wedges inside the small (horizontal) and 
large (vertical) corrugations. It can be seen that there is a gap of 80  mm 
in the central part of the small corrugations in between the two long 
wooden wedges. 
  
Figure 20 – Reinforcement of the primary membrane by wooden 
wedges (left) – Most deformed corrugation during test  140: 
comparison with a template (right). 
Only three rows of horizontal corrugations, around the  top part of the 
test blocks, presented visible deformations. All the deformations were 
in the form of dents on both sides of the corrugations but more 
pronounced on the lower side. The dents were visible only in the 
central part of the corrugation, where there was no support of the 
wooden wedges. No upward or downward global bending was noticed. 
The measurements of the indentations for each corrugation of the three 
rows were performed with the help of a template made directly with a 
spare part of the prima ry membrane (overlap membrane part). The 
template was put over the deformed corrugations as shown in 
Figure 21 (left). 
 
 
Small corrugation template Definition of the indentations 
Figure 21 – Measurement of the indentation of horizontal corrugations. 
Photos of the gap between the template and the deformed corrugation 
were made and post -processed in order to derive two values of 
deflections according to GTT‟s recommendations as shown in 
Figure 21 (right). The uncertainty on the final result was estimated  to 

be plus or minus 0.5 mm. 
The maximum indentation measured was 5  mm on the lower side of an 
upper corrugation of the rigid block, just above pressure sensor RP48. 
This sensor recorded a maximum pressure of 51.7  bar. The upper side 
of the corrugation was  also the most deformed with an indentation of 
2 mm. The picture obtained during the inspection for this corrugation is 
presented in Figure 20 (right) after geometrical correction by reference 
to the locations of the pink dots. 
The permanent deformations o n both sides of all the horizontal 
corrugations together with the maximum pressure measured by the 
sensors are presented in Figure 22. 
 
Figure 22 – Indentations on both sides of the 
horizontal corrugations and maximum pressure 
recorded by the sensors. Co lour scales are given on 
the right. 
 
When the corrugation is coloured in blue, it means that no visible 
deformation was observed. A quick look at Figure 22 allows one to 
notice that both the pressures and the permanent deflections on the 
corrugations are  lower on the Mark  III block than on the rigid. It is 
difficult to determine conclusively whether this is due to a fluid -
structure interaction influence or simply to 3D effects. Nevertheless, it 
is interesting to notice that the maximum deflections on the lower side 
of the upper corrugations of the Mark  III block range from 1.5 to 
2.8 mm whereas the corresponding deflection is 3.8  mm on the next 
corrugation on the right of the wall lying directly on the concrete. One 
could argue that it is due to boundary e ffects along the wall but this 
increase of deflection does not exist on the other side of the wall. 
Bogaert et al. (2010), describing a similar Sloshel test campaign but at a 
scale of 1:6, mentioned that there is a correlation between the upstream 
pressure close to a horizontal corrugation and the vertical force 
measured on this corrugation even though the distance to the 
corrugation has obviously a large influence on the pressure result. It is 
therefore interesting to compare the permanent deformation meas ured 
on the down side of a horizontal corrugation to the maximum upstream 
pressure measured by the closest sensor when available. Figure 23 
shows the results for the seven deformed corrugations having an 
upstream pressure sensor in their vicinity (distance  of 50 mm between 
the sensor and the centre of the corrugation). 
All the deformations and corresponding pressures on the Mark  III panel 
are lower than those on the rigid block for the upper line of 
corrugations (RP09 is located below the middle corrugation). 
The curve in red on Figure 23 is a strength curve of the small 
reinforced corrugation obtained from static tests at ambient 
temperature. The pressure was uniform around the corrugation during 
the tests and the deformations were symmetrical. 
There is a g ood linear correlation between the deflection and the 
maximum upstream pressure. Although the minimum visible permanent 
deformation (around 2 mm) was obtained for an upstream pressure very 
close to the static pressure for the same deflection, the trends gi ven by 
the two curves diverge progressively when the pressure increases: to 
obtain a given deformation, a much lower static pressure is needed than 
the maximum dynamic pressure measured upstream of the corrugation 
during test 140. 
 
Figure 23  – Permanent deflection of horizontal corrugation vs. 
Maximum measured upstream pressure (square dots) and maximum 
evaluated mean pressure (triangles). Labels of the pressure sensors are 
given. Yellow dots for Mark  III, grey dots for Rigid. S tatic strength 
curve in red. 
Two different reasons could be proposed: (1) the spatial distribution of 
the load on the corrugation; (2) an increase of the strength due to the 
load rate. 
For the first reason, one has indeed to consider that the pressure 
measured at the root of the corrugation is very high but in a strong 
region of the corrugation. The local pressure could be much lower in 
the central part of the lower corrugation side, which is structurally more 
sensitive. The corrugation sensor just above sensor RP27 can give some 
insight about this point. The maximum pressure at RP27 is 55.5  bar. 
The maximum vertical upward force measured by the corrugation 
sensor is 25.6  kN (see Figure 12). As the length of the corrugation is 
about 270 mm and its height is 37.2 mm, the surface on which the mean 
pressure is to be calculated is 0.01  m2. It means that the value of the 
force in kN is precisely the value of the mean pressure in bar. 
Therefore, the maximum mean pressure on the corrugation sensor is 
46% of the max imum upstream pressure. This ratio should be relevant 
for all upper corrugations on the rigid block as they withstood the same 
kind of loading process. Assuming this ratio for defining a relevant 
pressure associated to the permanent deformations of the upp er 
corrugations of the rigid blocks leads to a move of the grey square -
shaped dots of Figure 23 until the grey triangles. These new locations 
match reasonably well with the static strength curve at ambient. For 
such a comparable match for the corrugations on Mark  III a ratio 
around 60% is to be assumed. The orange square dots are thus replaced 
by the orange triangles. 
Such ratios fit rather well with the local loading processes proposed for 
the two blocks. Indeed the compression of an entrapped gas pocket 
underneath the corrugation (Mark  III block) would lead to an almost 
uniform pressure underneath the corrugation on a large part of it. 
Having a smaller ratio for the compression of an escaping air jet is 
expected as the pressure at the free end of the jet i s the atmospheric 
pressure. 
Therefore the distribution of the loads below the upper corrugations is 
enough to explain the difference between the static strength curve and 
the strength curve from test  140 built simply from the maximum 
upstream pressure. No special increase of strength due to a load rate 
influence is required. The static strength curve of the reinforced 
horizontal corrugations at ambient temperature is therefore relevant for 
highly dynamic impacts: for a given deflection during an impact, the  
related pressure from the curve gives a valuable estimation of the 
maximum average pressure really withstood by the corrugation. 

 
Mark III panel (foam + plywood plates) 
 
The Mark  III block used for the Sloshel campaign was a reinforced 
version: the spaces between adjacent mastic ropes was 100  mm instead 
of 140 mm for the standard version. 
 State of the Containment system (plywood and foam) 
After the test campaign, the Mark  III panel was dismounted and sawn 
into 16 blocks, through the slits of the primary fo am behind the 
corrugations. Every side of the blocks was carefully inspected visually, 
by several Sloshel partners, especially in the vicinity of the slit where 
plastic deformation were expected. No crack or residual deformation 
was detected either in the plywood plates or in the foam. 
Some small samples of foam were cut in the areas where plastic 
deformation had been expected and static compression tests were 
performed for comparison with static tests carried out before the 
campaign. The results in term of Young modulus and offset yield stress 
(0.2%) were not significantly changed and all in the usual range of 
characteristics. The conclusion was that the Mark  III panel was 
essentially intact after all Sloshel tests and therefore after test 140. 
 Comparison of measured Strains and Strength from static tests 
at ambient temperature: Strain rate influence 
Table 1 summarizes the maximum absolute transient values for the 
relevant strains as measured (1) below the top plate, (2) on the section 
of the foam in view of  the optical system and (3) on both sides of the 
back plate, together with the different material characteristics (offset 
(0.2%) yield strain (
 0) and Young modulus (E)) obtained from static 
tests at ambient. For the plates, the strains are the longitudina l 
 zz 
strains measured by all gauges available (see Figure 3). For the foam, 
the strains are the normal 
 xx strains as deduced from the optical system 
on all points in view of the cameras. 
Table 1 - Maximum strains in the Mark III panel and characteristics of 
materials from static tests at ambient 
 Max(
 zz) Max(
 xx) 
 0 %
 0 
 0 
(Bar) 
E 
(Bar) 
Top plate 0.002 - 0.007 29% 700 100000 
Foam - 0.015 0.02 75% 14 780 
Back plate 0.002 - 0.007 29% 700 100000 
0, 
 0: offset yield strain and stress (0.2%) 
The utiliz ation factor of the static strength at ambient, defined as the 
ratio of the maximum strain to the maximum corresponding offset yield 
strain, is around 30% for both plywood plates and 75% for the foam. It 
must be kept in mind that for the foam we have only information on a 
boundary section where the maximum load recorded was only 2/3 of 
the maximum recorded on the Mark  III panel. If we considered the 
most highly loaded section and applied a magnification factor of 3/2 on 
the corresponding strains, the utiliz ation factor would be 113%. 
Therefore, in the vertical boundary section observed by the two high 
speed cameras of the optical system, the static strength was sufficient to 
withstand the load without any plastic deformation. But in more inner 
sections, smal l areas in the foam below the upper slit should have 
experienced plastic deformations if only the static strength was 
available. This means that the strength was higher than the static 
strength at least in the most loaded areas. 
Now, the maximum strain rat e in the foam derived from the optical 
system data was around 10  /s. The highest values were obtained just 
under the upper slit. At the level of pressure sensor MP4, namely 
50 mm underneath the slit, the strains shown in Figure 18 (right) have 
a highest rate of 7 /s. For a strain rate around 10/s, the Young modulus 
is quite similar (slightly increased) compared to quasi -static conditions, 
whereas the offset yield stress is highly increased. Therefore, in the 
local areas concerned by such a strain rate (just  behind the top plate), 
the higher strength of the foam due to the strain rate influence 
prevented any plastic deformation into the foam. 
However this strain rate influence does not explain the low level of 
strains measured. 
 Influence of the dynamic behavi or of the top plate on the load 
distribution 
Figure 24 shows the normal stresses 
 xx into the foam at six points on a 
horizontal line starting from pressure sensor MP4, five centimeters 
below the slit behind the upper corrugation. The reference points are 
shown on Figure 14. The strains have been presented at the same 
points on Figure 18. The stresses have been deduced from the strains 
using the Young modulus in Table 1, obtained from static tests at 
ambient. This is relevant because the Young modulus does not change 
much for strain rates lower than 10  /s. The pressure at MP4 has been 
added on Figure 24 as it is also the normal stress on the skin of the top 
plate at MP4. 
 
Figure 24  - Time traces of the pressure at MP4 and of the normal 
stresses 
 xx at six points at the same height as MP4. 
There is a strong attenuation of the normal stress from the skin of the 
top plate (x  = 0) to the first point in the foam in view of the optical 
system (x = 30 mm). The reduction factor is 3.6 wh en the pressure is at 
its maximum at MP4. It can also be noticed that the oscillations of the 
strains are stronger close to the plate than further into the foam but 
these oscillations are not clearly correlated with those at the strain 
gauge ST4 under the top plate on the same horizontal line. 
What would have been expected from a more traditional analysis with 
only the records from the pressure sensors? A first well known reason 
for a reduction of stress into the foam is the distribution of the load by 
the cover plate. A current approach  (see LR Sloshing Assessment 
Guidelines, 2009 or Gervaise, 2009) proposes to compare the mean 
maximum pressure calculated on different loaded areas (loading curve) 
to a static strength curve evaluated by static tests with pat ch loads. The 
pressure may be corrected by a Dynamic Amplification Factor 
evaluated by Finite Element dynamic analysis for different rise times of 
the load.  Such a static strength curve takes benefit of the load 
distribution by the cover plate. 
Let us firs t construct a loading curve: the minimum loaded area 
considered is 0.06  m x 0.06  m=0.0036 m2, which corresponds to the 
area of influence of a single pressure sensor (60  mm between sensors). 
The maximum pressure to be considered for this smallest area is 30  bar 
obtained on sensor MP42. In contrast, when considering the entirety of 
the Mark  III panel, an associated peak pressure may be calculated as 
peak transient force, namely 726  kN as measured by the load cells 
behind the panel, divided by associated area,  namely 1.2  m2, which 
gives 6 bar. The intermediate areas have been chosen considering a row 
of sensors (area: 0.08  m x 1.2  m=0.096 m2; mean pressure from MP4, 
MP42 and MP48=20  bar) and a more complete collection of sensors 
(0.33 m2, 11 bar). 

For choosing a strength curve a special attention must be paid to the 
criterion. Criteria adopted on board ships can be related to two limit 
states: (1) failure of the back plywood in between two mastic ropes by 
shear or bending fracture. The criterion for the strength  is a maximum 
residual deflection of 0.5  mm of the back plywood; (2) fatigue of a 
membrane knot by rotation when not well supported due to foam 
crushing – the criterion for which is 10  mm crushing. GTT has built 
several experimental strength curves by stat ic tests of the standard and 
reinforced version of Mark III with patch loads at ambient or in service 
conditions. At ambient and for a standard version of Mark  III, the 
criterion on the back plywood is more severe and thus the tests are 
conducted with seve ral displacement sensors located behind the back 
plywood. The foam is checked at the end of the tests. Such a strength 
curve would provide significantly higher values than the loading curve 
for test  140 but would not help understanding. For the reinforced 
version the foam crushes before the failure of the back plywood occurs 
but there is no experimental strength curve available at ambient 
temperature. Therefore, for the purposes of this paper we propose a 
strength curve based on numerical simulations for th e reinforced 
version at ambient temperature. The criterion chosen is the occurrence 
of a first plastic deformation into the foam. 
The loading curve for test  140 and numerical strength curve at ambient 
temperature are presented on Figure 25. A numerical str ength curve 
based on the same criterion of no plastic deformation into the foam but 
with a thermal gradient from -162°C on the membrane to 20°C at the 
mastic ropes level has also been added. 
 
Figure 25  – Loading curve from test  140 (dark blue) - Numerical 
static strength (first plastic deformation) for reinforced Mark  III panel 
at ambient (light blue) and with a thermal gradient in the Mark  III 
panel (red). 
This approach appears to be conservative as for the small loaded areas 
large zones of plastic deformation into the foam would have been 
expected from the strength curve at ambient temperature, which was 
not the case in reality. With an in -service thermal gradient of 
temperature through the thickness of the foam, the strength would 
increase significantly when considering smaller and smaller patch loads 
- this is not the case at ambient temperature. It suggests that the 
distribution of the load for small patches is efficient at cold temperature 
but not at ambient, due to a stiff ening of the foam at low temperature 
which limits the local bending of the top plate. Therefore, the 
distribution of the load by the top plate seems not to be the right 
explanation for the low level of strains during test  140, at least when 
the spatial distribution of the loads is made by averaged patch loads. 
A 2D Finite Element (FE) model of a vertical section of the Mark  III 
panel was built in order to perform static and dynamic calculations and 
compare both behaviors. The linear material properties of t he plywood 
and the foam described in Table 1 were adopted. The plywood plates 
and the foam were discretized with 10x10  mm2 elements. Static and 
dynamic calculations were performed with a load uniformly distributed 
on a patch area of 80  mm just under the up per slit. For the dynamic 
calculation, the load was given directly by the pressure recorded at 
sensor MP4. For the static calculation, a load of 22  bar, corresponding 
to the maximum pressure at sensor MP4, was applied. 
Figure 25 shows the results in terms of normal stresses for both 
calculations. The black area corresponds to higher stresses than the 
offset yield stress for static tests at ambient (14 bar). 
For both calculations, there is a large area under the slit for which the 
offset yield stress is exce eded. No reduction of stress behind the top 
plate is noticed. Moreover, there is a significant amplification of the 
strains into the foam when considering the dynamic load and therefore 
the black area is even larger. The maximum displacements under the 
slit are respectively 5  mm for the static calculation and 5.9  mm for the 
dynamic calculation, to be compared to the 2.6  mm obtained in reality. 
Whatever the size of the loaded area, the patch load approach would 
always lead to a dynamic amplification (even small) of the strains. Only 
for very small rise times (lower than 0.2  ms) a dynamic attenuation 
might occur. This is not the case here as the rise time of pressure sensor 
MP4 is larger than 1  ms. Therefore, the dynamic behavior of the 
plywood plates and the foam does not seem to be the right explanation 
for the attenuation of the strains behind the top plate, at least when the 
spatial distribution of the loads is made by averaged patch loads. 
 
  
Scale for stresses (Mpa) Static Dynamic 
Figure 25  – normal stresses in the foam calculated by static and 
dynamic FEA on a 2D model of Mark III reinforced panel with a patch 
load on an area of 80  mm under the upper slit. Dynamic load =  
pressure recorded at MP4. Static load= 22 bar = max at MP4. 
Whichever the way a static load would be interpolated from the sensor 
signals MP4, MP5 and MP8 when pressure at MP4 is at maximum, the 
resultant strains would be significantly higher, but for a larger loaded 
area, thus for a smaller strength, as it has been verified with several 
calculations. So, a better spatial distribution of the loads does not 
appear to explain the attenuation of the strains into the foam at least for 
static loads. 
All the ab ove results combine two main parameters: (1) the spatial 
distribution of the loads (patch load/real distribution); (2) the dynamic 
behavior (static/dynamic). The results of test  140 indicate that there is 
an attenuation of the strains into the foam when th e load is correctly 
distributed in space and time. Other results obtained by calculations for 
simplified spatial or time distributions are summarized in Table 2 by an 
amplification factor of the maximum deflection with regards to the 
measured one . These fa ctors are given here just as an indication of a 
general trend related to possible simplifications of load modeling. 
Table 2 – amplification factors on the maximum displacement from 
FE calculations for different simplifications of the load modeling for 
test 140. 
 Static load Real time distribution 
Patch load 1.8 2.1 
Real space distribution 3.0 1 

The simplifications of the spatial and time distributions of the loads that 
are commonly used lead to an overestimation of the strains into the 
foam and of the m aximum displacement for the conditions of test  140. 
Therefore only a realistic dynamic loading with explicit FE calculations 
on the whole loaded area should be able to explain the real results. 
This is not as simple as it could be first thought because the  knowledge 
on the load through the pressure sensors is incomplete. For instance, 
among the eight sensors (MP1 to MP8) on the same column, that are of 
interest for the behavior of the foam in view of the optical system, only 
4 sensors were working correctly  and a major event such as the 
reattachment of the flow on the wall after its separation from the middle 
corrugation was not captured. Even with a complete column of close 
working sensors, as shown in Figure  6 for the rigid block, the 
continuity between th e signals is not obvious and a relevant 
interpolation is not straightforward. Nevertheless work is in progress on 
this matter. 
It is believed that when considering a realistic time -space distribution 
for such globally upwards traveling loads obtained with breaking 
waves, the dynamic bending behavior of the top plate stiffened by the 
foam is different than with patch loads and leads to a much better 
distribution of the loads into the foam. It appears as though the high 
frequency content of the pressure peaks  were filtered by the global 
dynamic behavior of the top plate. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
During a Sloshel wave impact campaign in a flume involving a fully 
instrumented reinforced Mark  III panel, a Flip -Through impact 
inducing high pressures was generated (referred t o as test  140). Such a 
Flip-Through impact is considered to be very unlikely on board a LNG 
carrier but the highly dynamic loading conditions it generates bring 
insight about fluid-structure interaction in extreme conditions. 
During a Flip -Through, the mov ing forward of the wave front and the 
run-up of the wave trough progress simultaneously until the front and 
the trough meet in a very restricted area (restricted trough conditions). 
The combined analysis of the pressure signals and the videos from high 
speed cameras watching closely the impact through an observation 
window enabled the decomposition of the loading mechanisms. 
The elementary loading processes (ELP) appear to be very general as 
far as wave impacts on a structure are concerned. They are: (1) the 
actual impact (discontinuity of velocity), very localized and inducing 
acoustic pressure with the local velocity of sound of the aerated water; 
(2) the building of a jet along the wall from the impact area. The sharp 
turn of the velocities induces a trav eling pressure pulse at the root of 
the jet; (3) the compression of entrapped gas pockets or escaping gas 
jets. 
All these processes generate loads directly in their vicinity. They have 
also a more remote influence transmitted by pressure waves through the 
fluids. 
In the particular case of test  140, the situations in which the ELPs 
developed are related to the nature of the impact (Flip -Through) and to 
the interactions with the corrugated membrane are: (a) violent 
reattachment of the flow after separation fr om a corrugation during the 
trough run -up (ELP1); (b) building jet from the reattachment point 
(ELP2); (c) compression of the gas pockets entrapped above the 
corrugation during the reattachment or entrapped in between the 
reattachment point, the wave front  and the upper corrugation (ELP3); 
(d) impact of the jet on the root of the upper corrugation (ELP1); 
(e) compression of a jet of escaping gas below a corrugation (ELP3). 
The development of different kinds of free surface instabilities appears 
to be also a  general process associated to wave impacts - these are: 
(1) Kelvin-Helmotz (KH) instabilities due to the tangential jet of 
escaping gas; (2) Rayleigh-Taylor (RT) instabilities when entrapped 
gas tends to penetrate the free surface. 
During test  140, KH dev eloped during the forward move of the wave 
front and also below the corrugations. It is believed the KH instability 
is the main cause of the non repeatability of wave impact pressure 
measurements even on a flat wall. RT developed underneath the upper 
corrugation during the final compression of the escaping air jet or the 
entrapped air pocket. RT might be a mitigating process preventing 
higher compression. RT creates locally clouds of fine bubbles which 
eventually increase the aeration of the water. Both phe nomena should 
be studied further in the context of sloshing as they seem to have a 
large influence on the impact pressures. 
The maximum pressure recorded on the rigid block was 56  bar whereas 
it was 30  bar on the Mark  III panel. In both cases the maximum 
pressure occurred under the upper corrugation. Although the flow was 
predominantly 2D, the loading processes involved were different on the 
rigid block and the Mark  III panel. On the rigid block, the gas was 
escaping until the last moment whereas it was ent rapped much earlier 
on the Mark  III panel. This difference was considered to be the main 
reason for the discrepancy on the maximum pressures. It could be 
simply attributed to small 3D variations of the flow. Nevertheless, the 
entrapment of gas was favored by the receding of the foam just below 
the upper corrugation and the related rotation of the corrugation. 
Therefore, the gap between the maximum pressures could also be 
attributed to fluid-structure interactions. In such a case, hydro -elasticity 
appears as more complex than a mass/spring system interacting with a 
given wave loading process, and could be the cause of a switch from 
one loading process to another. 
Three rows of horizontal reinforced corrugations were deformed during 
test 140. The vertical corr ugations were not deformed. Indentations on 
both sides of the horizontal corrugations occurred in their central part 
where there was no support from the wooden wedges. The deflections 
were significantly more pronounced on the lower side. No global 
bending of the corrugations was observed. Maximum measured 
deflection was 5 mm.  
This type and level of permanent deflection of the membrane 
corrugations is not considered as damage since fatigue tests conducted 
by GTT have shown that deformed corrugations still b ehave in the 
same way as non deformed corrugations and their lifetime is not 
shortened. 
The level of deflection is clearly correlated to the maximum upstream 
pressure (50 mm below the center of the corrugation, thus very close to 
the foot of the corrugatio n). Consequently, the deflections are lower on 
the Mark  III panel than on the rigid block. As on both sides of the 
Mark III panel the deflections on the rigidly supported corrugations are 
larger than on the Mark  III supported corrugations, hydro -structure 
interaction appears to be a better explanation than random 3D effects. 
The maximum mean pressure on the lower side of a corrugation is 
lower than the corresponding maximum upstream pressure. The ratio 
deduced from comparison between the force measuremen t by the 
horizontal corrugation sensor and the upstream pressure measurement 
(sensor RP27) is 46%. This ratio should be relevant for all upper 
corrugations of the rigid block as the loading process remains the same. 
When applying this ratio to the measured  upstream pressures for 
defining a relevant pressure corresponding to a deflection of any 
horizontal upper corrugations of the rigid block and to be compared 
with the strength curve obtained by GTT with static tests at ambient, 
the points match rather well  with the curve. For a comparable match 
with the corrugations on Mark  III a ratio of 60% is suggested. These 
ratios fit quite well with the two loading processes proposed for the 
rigid block and Mark III panel, namely the compression of respectively 
a jet of escaping air or an entrapped gas pocket. Therefore, considering 
a static strength curve for the corrugations appears to be relevant: no 
special reinforcement due to a load rate influence appears to be needed 
to be taken into account. 
Although having experienced local pressures of up to 30 bar, exceeding 
by far the offset yield stress in quasi -static conditions at ambient 
temperature, the foam of the Mark  III panel did not exhibit any 
discernible cracking or discernible plastic deformation area after the 
test, according to visual inspection after cutting the panel in 12 blocks 
and according to material tests on small samples. 
From the post -processing of the optical system measurement, the 
strains exceeded the quasi -static offset yield strain inside the foa m, at 
least locally under the relaxation slit behind the upper corrugation. As 
the strain rate in this area was around 10  /s and as the strength (offset 
yield strain) of the foam is much larger for this range of strain rate, the 
dynamics of the material pl ayed a clear positive role to prevent any 
plastic deformation. 
Moreover, the maximum transient displacement deduced from the 
optical system measurements was only 2.6  mm. A significant 
attenuation of the stress level just behind the top plate was observed 
which could not simply be explained by just the dynamics of the 
material, as the Young modulus was only moderately increased for the 
considered range of strain rates. It appears that the pressure signal was 
filtered by the top plate stiffened by the foam. 
According to the current approach, consisting of comparing maximum 
averaged pressures on different loaded areas (loading curve) to 
strengths obtained under corresponding quasi -static patch loads 
(strength curve), the most relevant loading areas for test  140 are the 
small areas for which the load exceeds the strength. For such areas 
chosen just under the upper slit, the distribution of the load by the cover 
plate turns out not to be efficient at ambient temperature. Finite element 
calculations with the maximu m averaged pressure on this area would 
lead to a large overestimation of the maximum displacement. 
Introducing the dynamics of the load would amplify the maximum 
displacement. Introducing the spatial distribution of the loads for quasi -
static conditions would lead to an even worse theoretical result. 
It seems that only a realistic distribution of the load in space and in time 
can lead to the actual structural response. This can unfortunately not be 
easily tested by FE calculations because the density of wor king 
pressure sensors is too scarce for a relevant interpolation of the load in 
space and time domains. Fully coupled fluid -structure interaction 
analysis (FSI) is seen as a way forward. Nevertheless some efforts are 
being made to reconstruct the actual in terpolated load by an iterative 
process taking benefit of the knowledge gained from the loading 
process analysis. 
Finally it is interesting to note that the Mark  III structural behavior 
seems to adjust favorably to the worse in service conditions, by: 
 large increase of the elastic domain for strain rates around 10 /s; 
 strain attenuation for a realistic space and time distribution of the 
load, at least in case of highly dynamic loading conditions; 
 better load distribution by the top plate under cryogenic 
temperatures; 
 large increase of the Young modulus and of the offset yield stress 
of the foam under cryogenic temperatures. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the unanimous views of all the Sloshel consortium 
members. 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support provided by the 
Sloshel consortium members that have made the Sloshel project 
possible: American Bureau of Shipping, Bureau Veritas, Ecole Centrale 
Marseille, Chevron, Class NK, Det Norske Veritas, GDF SUEZ, GTT, 
Lloyd‟s Register EMEA, MARIN, Total and Shell. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bogaert, H., Brosset, L., Kaminski, M.L., (2010) “ Interactions between 
wave impacts and corrugations of Mark III Containment System for LNG 
carriers: findings from the Sloshel project”, 20th (2010) Int. Offshore and 
Polar Eng. Conf., Beijing, China, ISOPE. 
Brosset, L., Mravak, Z., Kaminski, M., Collins, S., Finnigan, T., (2009)  
“Overview of Sloshel project”, 19th (2009) Int. Offshore and Polar Eng. 
Conf., Osaka, Japan, ISOPE. 
Carden, E.R., Maguire, J.R., Durley -Boot, N.J., (2011) “ Modal 
testing and model reconciliation of the Sloshel Mk III test panel ”, 
21st (2011) Int. Offshore and Polar Eng. Conf., Maui, (HI), USA, 
ISOPE. 
Drazin, P.G., Reid, W.H., “ Hydrodynamic Stability ”, Cambridge 
University Press, 2004  
Gervaise, E., de Sèze, P.E., Maillard, S., (2009)  “Reliability-based 
methodology for sloshing assessment of membrane LNG vessels” , 19 th 
(2009) Int. Offshore and Polar Eng. Conf., Osaka, Japan, ISOPE. 
Hofland, B., Kaminski, M.L., Wolters, G., (2010) “ Large Scale Wave 
Impacts on a Vertical Wall”, 32nd Int. Conf. on Coastal Engineering, ICCE 
2010, Shanghaï, China, June 30 – July 5, 2010. 
Kaminski, M.L., Bogaert, H., (2010). “Full-Scale Sloshing Impact Tests 
Part II”, 20th (2010) Int. Offshore and Polar Eng. Conf., Beijing, China, 
ISOPE. 
Kaminski, M.L., Bogaert, H., Brosset, L., (2011). ” Full and large scale 
wave impact tests for a better understanding of sloshing – Results of the 
Sloshel project”, 30th (2011) Int.  Conf. on Ocean, Offshore and Arctic 
Eng. OMAE 2011-49992, Rotterdam, the Netherlands 
Kimmoun, O., Ratouis, A., Brosset, L., (2010)  “Sloshing and scaling: 
experimental study in a wave canal at two different scales”, 20th (2010) 
Int. Offshore and Polar Eng. Conf., Beijing, China, ISOPE. 
Lafeber, W., Brosset, L., Bogaert, H., (2011) “ Loads on Mark  III 
corrugated primary membrane: findings from the Sloshel project ”, 21st 
(2011) Int. Offshore and Polar Eng. Conf., Maui, (HI), USA, ISOPE. 
Lloyds Register, (2009)  “Sloshing Assessment Guidelines (SAG), 
Version 2”, May 2009 
Wagner, H., (1932) “Uber Stoss- und Gleitvorgänge an der Oberfläche 
von Flüssigkeiten ”, Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 12, pp 193 -215 (English 
transl: “ Phenomena associated with impacts and sliding on liq uid 
surfaces”, NACA Translation 1366.) 
Copyright ©20 10 The International Society of Offshore and Polar 
Engineers (ISOPE). All rights reserved. 