 Interaction between wave impacts and corrugations of MarkIII Containment System for LNG carriers: 
findings from the Sloshel project 
 
H. Bogaert(1,2), L. Brosset(3), M.L. Kaminski(1) 
1MARIN, Hydro Structural Services, Wageningen, The Netherlands 
2Delft University of Technology, Ship Structures Laboratory, Delft, The Netherlands 
3GTT (Gaztransport & Technigaz), Liquid Motion Department, Saint-Rémy-lès-Chevreuse, France 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The subject of this paper is the behavior of MarkIII corrugated primary 
membrane under breaking wave impacts. The study is based on the 
database of the large scale impact tests  from the Sloshel project. 
Unidirectional breaking waves were generated in a flume tank in order 
to break onto an instrumented wall covered by a corrugated surface 
reproducing the MarkIII membrane at scale 1:6. Pressure sensors were 
positioned in between the corrugations. A special sensor was designed 
to measure the net force in the upward and downward direction on a 
horizontal corrugation. Special care was taken to observe the 
interaction between the wave impact and the corrugations by high 
speed cameras synchronized with the data acquisition system. 
Four sources of impact loads on the corrugations were observed: the 
wave trough, the wave crest, the jet formed after wave impact or the 
entrapped air. This observation gave evidence that more mechanisms 
are involved during sloshing-corrugation interaction than those 
indentified previously with wet drop tests. Moreover, the pressure 
measured upstream and downstream of a horizontal corrugation is 
correlated to the global vertical force, but this relation depends highly 
on the sensor position with regards to the corrugation, and the source of 
loading. 
The paper describes the different kinds of corrugation loadings during 
breaking wave impacts. It emphasizes the need to take into account the 
sloshing corrugation interaction into a sloshing assessment 
methodology but shows that applying scaled corrugations in small scale 
tests (scale around 1:40 - 1:35) is not adequate. 
 
KEY WORDS: sloshing, LNG carrier, membrane containment 
system, MarkIII, corrugation, impact pressure, model test, flume tank, 
breaking wave. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
MarkIII is one of the membrane Cargo Containment Systems (CCS) 
designed by GTT for LNG carriers. It is mainly composed of 3 m x 1 m 
panels of polyurethane foam covered by a stainless steel corrugated 
membrane in contact with the LNG at -162°C (see Figure 1). The 
panels are bonded to the double hull by resin ropes. 
The membrane features large parallel corrugations crossing 
perpendicularly small parallel corrugations. The large and small 
corrugations are respectively 54 mm and 37.2 mm high. The distance 
between two large or two small corrugations is 340 mm. On the 
longitudinal walls of the MarkIII tanks the large corrugations are 
vertical whilst they are horizontal on the transverse bulkheads. 
 
Figure 1  – MarkIII containment system (left), sample of the 
corrugated membrane (right) 
In 2008, some deformations of the membrane corrugations were 
observed for the first time on board several MarkIII ships during 
routine dry dock inspections. These deformations, without any leakage 
of the cargo, affected both large and small corrugations mainly in the 
corners of the ceiling and less frequently in the region covering a few 
meters above the chamfers of the longitudinal bulkheads. They had 
clearly been caused by sloshing impacts. Some corrugations were 
globally bent whereas some others were pinched almost symmetrically. 
The design loads on the CCS of membrane ships are determined by 
using a sloshing assessment methodology based on model tests with 
tanks at scale 1:40 and flat walls (see Gervaise et al., 2009). After these 
incidents some questions were raised: 
/square4 How to determine the loads on the corrugations? 
/square4 Could the presence of corrugations magnify the loads locally on 
the polyurethane foam? 
/square4 How to take this influence into account within the methodology? 
Is it relevant to have scaled corrugations inside the model tanks? 
After the incidents an investigation plan was launched by GTT. A 
reverse engineering process permitted to evaluate the loads capable of 
producing the different deformations observed. It was concluded that, 
with a static pressure up to 20 bar, both the corrugations and the 
insulation below remain sound, even though the corrugations may be 
significantly deformed. 
The analysis presented in this paper was carried out based on 
experimental results from the Sloshel project (see Brosset et al., 2009). 
So-called large scale tests  were carried out by MARIN in the Scheldt 
flume of Deltares (NL). Unidirectional breaking waves were generated 
in the flume in order to impact an instrumented rigid vertical wall. Two 
configurations of the wall were tested: a flat wall and a corrugated wall 
Proceedings of the Twentieth (2010) International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference 
Beijing, China, June 2025, 2010 
Copyright © 2010 by The International Society of Offshore and Polar Engineers (ISOPE) 
ISBN 978-1-880653-77-7 (Set); ISSN 1098-6189 (Set); www.isope.org  
 
109